doc/md/cloud: add drift detection documentation (#2427)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/cloud/agents.mdx

---
title: Drift Detection
id: agents
slug: /cloud/agents
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

### Background

Managing database schemas is hard. Since they are the (oftentimes only) stateful component in an application, issues
originating in a faulty database state can have wide impact on your products and services. A relatively simple issue,
that can have a huge impact is when the database schema is not in sync with what downstream consumers expect it to be.
In thi doc, we want to present how Atlas can help detect those schema drifts by monitoring your databases and
comparing their state with what you expect it to be and notifying you, once there is a schema change.

:::info PREMIUM FEATURE

> Drift Detection is currently only available in the premium subscription.

Author: To what? The pricing?

:::

### Connect to your database from Atlas Cloud

Since our goal is for Atlas to monitor our schemas and ensure they are in sync with what we have defined, Atlas needs
to be able to connect to our database. However, opening up a production database (or any database) to the internet
is not a good idea. A common solution to this is to have a "thing" running in your VPC, that has connection to the

> internet and to your database. This "thing" is commonly called an Agent and Atlas now offers such a solution as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
internet and to your database. This "thing" is commonly called an _agent_ and Atlas now offers such a solution as well.
```

### Create an Agent

The first step to establish a connection between Atlas and your database, is telling Atlas about your intention to do

> so. Head over to the general settings and click on the Agents tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so. Head over to the general settings and click on the "Agents" tab.
```

:::info

> Only admins can create Agents. Ensure you have sufficient permissions before proceeding.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only admins can create agents. Ensure you have sufficient permissions before proceeding.
```

:::

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/6551a17e-d1df-4ae6-a6d2-051419c900d1)
</details>

Pick a name for your agent and hit **Create Agent**.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/8c6ea303-db9a-47da-bfef-ea0fa7a22401)
</details>

### Connect the Agent

> Now that we have created an Agent in Atlas, we need to run the Agent binary in our VPC and check if it can access the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have created an agent in Atlas, we need to run the agent binary in our VPC and check if it can access the
```

cloud. To authenticate against Atlas, a token will be created that you need to provide the Agent with. Store this token
in a secure place, as you won't be able to see it again. However, you can always create a new one.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/2aac6477-deea-4c4a-b555-b04253e0dd7a)
</details>

If the agent has access to the internet and can reach Atlas, you should see a success message.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/55d0646f-197f-4881-8f95-7f5124dc3e79)
</details>

> The Agent is running now and can connect to Atlas. However, in order to connect to your databases, it needs to know

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the agent is running and can connect to Atlas. However, in order to connect to your databases, it needs to know
```

how to obtain valid credentials and how to use them.

### Database Credentials

> Since we want the Agent to connect to our database on behalf of Atlas, it needs to know how to access it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since we want the agent to connect to our database on behalf of Atlas, it needs to know how to access it.
```

> For this, we can assign an agent multiple database connections. Either click the **Set up Database Connection** or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this we can assign an agent multiple database connections. Either click the **Set up Database Connection** or
```

select the **Database Connections** tab and hit **Create Connection**.

:::info

> You can only create a connection with an actively running Agent. If there is no Agent selectable in the dropdown,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can only create a connection with an actively running agent. If there is no agent selectable in the dropdown,
```

> ensure the Agent binary is still running and has access to the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ensure the agent binary is still running and has access to the cloud.
```

:::

Fill out the form with the connection details to your database.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/b9d17dbe-e5c3-460a-9dd9-864ddb888ff8)
</details>

<Tabs>
<TabItem value="aws_iam" label="AWS RDS Token (IAM Auth)">

> AWS RDS databases offer to obtain a short lived token using an IAM role to authenticate against an RDS instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AWS RDS databases offer to obtain a short-lived token using an IAM role to authenticate against an RDS instance.
```

1. Enable IAM Authentication for your database. For instructions on how to do this,
   [see the AWS documentation](https://aws.github.io/aws-sdk-go-v2/docs/sdk-utilities/rds/#iam-authentication).

2. Create an IAM role with the "rds-db:connect" permission for the specific database and user. For instructions on how to do this,
   [see the AWS documentation](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AmazonRDS/latest/UserGuide/UsingWithRDS.IAMDBAuth.IAMPolicy.html).

All other info required to obtain a token is derived from the RDS endpoint you define in the connection modal.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="aws_secrets" label="AWS Secrets Manager">

AWS Secrets Manager is a secret store you can use to retrieve a secret from. This is somewhat similar to IAM

> authentication, since in this case you need to have access to the secrets store, usually using IAM authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
authentication, since in this case you need to have access to the secret's store, usually using IAM authentication.
```

Find the secret name and region for your secret. If you need more info,

> [read this](/guides/deploying/secrets##using-iam-authentication). If your secret is stored as JSON, e.g. when you chose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[read this guide](/guides/deploying/secrets##using-iam-authentication). If your secret is stored as JSON, e.g. when you choose
```

> to let RDS handle your database password in Screts Manager , you can provide the path to the actual token using a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to let RDS handle your database password in the Secrets Manager, you can provide the path to the actual token using a
```

> dot-notation, e.g. for a secret like `{"password":"my_passw0rd!"}` you'd provide `.password` as path to the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dot-notation. For example, for a secret like `{"password":"my_passw0rd!"}` you'd provide `.password` as the path to the token.
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="gcp_iam" label="GCP Cloud SQL Token (IAM Auth)">

[GCP CloudSQL](https://cloud.google.com/sql) offers using
[IAM Authentication](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/authentication#manual) to generate a short-lived token to
use for authentication against a GCP CloudSQL database.

1. Enable IAM Authentication for your database. For instructions on how to do this,
   [see the GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/create-edit-iam-instances).

2. Create a database user and grant it permission to authenticate using IAM, see
   [the GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/add-manage-iam-users)
   for instructions.

All other info required to obtain a token is derived from the CloudSQL endpoint you define in the connection modal.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="gcp_secrets" label="GCP Secrets Manager">

> GCP Secrets Manager is a secret store you can use to retrieve a secret from. Find the project id and secret name od your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GCP Secrets Manager is a secret store you can use to retrieve a secret from. Find the project ID and secret name of your
```

> secret. If you need more info, [read this](/guides/deploying/secrets##using-iam-authentication). If your secret is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
secret. If you need more info, [read this guide](/guides/deploying/secrets##using-iam-authentication). If your secret is
```

> stored as JSON, you can provide the path to the actual token using a dot-notation, e.g. for a secret like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
stored as a JSON, you can provide the path to the actual token using a dot-notation. For example, for a secret like
```

> `{"password":"my_passw0rd!"}` you'd provide `.password` as path to the token.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`{"password":"my_passw0rd!"}` you'd provide `.password` as the path to the token.
```

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="env" label="Environment Variable">

> You can tell the Agent to look for the password in a environment variable. E.g. if your password lives in an environment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can tell the agent to look for the password in an environment variable. For example, if your password lives in an environment
```

> variable like `DATABASE_PASSWORD=passw0rd` you'd provide `DATABASE_PASSWORD` to the agent, not the actual.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
variable like `DATABASE_PASSWORD=passw0rd` you'd provide `DATABASE_PASSWORD` to the agent.
```

:::danger
We advise to use either IAM authentication or a Secrets Manager to obtain a database password.
:::

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

To ensure the credentials are correct, Atlas will check if the credentials are working before we can save them. Hit

> the **Test Connection** button and wait. It can take a few seconds before the Agent will pick up the job and check

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the **Test Connection** button and wait. It can take a few seconds before the agent will pick up the job and check
```

the connection to the database.

> If all goes well, we should see a message telling us that Atlas was able to connect to out database through the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If all goes well, we should see a message telling us that Atlas was able to connect to our database through the
```

agent.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/a0371b48-fc1f-45fb-8f26-9ea1cb3a025f)
</details>

### Drift Detection

> Once Atlas can connect to your database, it can start monitoring your schema and warn you, if it detects a drift

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once Atlas can connect to your database, it can start monitoring your schema and warn you if it detects a drift
```

between your migration directory and its deployment. In the migration directory overview, click on
**Enable Drift Detection**. You'll be asked which database connection the deployments are reachable on.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/9c4e567d-c86b-4c7c-8b35-65dd43f2f123)
</details>

Once enabled, Atlas will run drift detection jobs twice a day. If there is a drift, Atlas will provide you with detailed

> information about the diff., including an ERD, HCL diff and SQL statements required to fix the drift.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information about the drift, including an ERD, HCL diff and SQL statements required to fix the drift.
```

:::danger

> Do not apply the SQL blindfolded to fix the drift. It is potentially destructive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not apply the SQL blindly to fix the drift. It is potentially destructive.
```

:::

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![image](https://github.com/ariga/atlas/assets/12862103/a48100c1-9f5d-41c9-b184-ffe816f1d623)
</details>

### Notifications

> You can instruct Atlas to notify you if there is a drift. Atlas support various channels, e.g. via email, Slack,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can instruct Atlas to notify you if there is a drift. Atlas supports various channels, such as email, Slack,
```

---
title: Drift Detection
id: agents
slug: /cloud/agents
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

### Background

> Some features require Atlas Cloud to connect to your database. As it is uncommon for databases to be directly accessible

Reviewer 2: add Link to Atlas Cloud

from the internet, you can run Atlas Agents in your database's network to facilitate this communication. Agents register
themselves via credentials against your Atlas Cloud account and continuously poll it for work.

The following features require an Atlas Agent installed in your databases network:
* Drift Detection
* Cloud mediated deployments (coming soon)
* Schema monitoring and auditing (coming soon)

:::info PREMIUM FEATURE
Drift Detection is currently only available in the premium subscription.
:::

### Create an Agent

> The first step to establish a connection between Atlas and your database, is telling Atlas about your intention to do
> so. Head over to the general settings and click on the "Agents" tab.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create an agent, head over to the general settings and click on the "Agents" tab.
```

:::info
Only admins can create agents. Ensure you have sufficient permissions before proceeding.
:::

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/1.png)
</details>

Pick a name for your agent and hit **Create Agent**.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/2.png)
</details>

### Connect the Agent

> Now that we have created an agent in Atlas, we need to run the agent binary in our VPC and check if it can access the
> cloud. To authenticate against Atlas, a token will be created which you will need to provide the agent with. Store this token
> in a secure place, as you won't be able to see it again. However, you can always create a new one.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Now that we have created an agent in your Atlas Cloud account, we can run an agent process. This is typically done by running it in the same network as our target database.  To authenticate against your Atlas Cloud account, a token will be created which you will need to provide the agent with. Store this token
in a secure place, as you won't be able to see it again. If needed, you can always create a new one later.
```

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/3.png)
</details>

> If the agent has access to the internet and can reach Atlas, you should see a success message.

Reviewer 3: The image isn't enough here, add some more instructions on how to actually start the agent. In this section you will also add Kubernetes, ECS, etc..

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/4.png)
</details>

Now the agent is running and can connect to Atlas. However, in order to connect to your databases, it needs to know
how to obtain valid credentials and how to use them.

### Database Credentials

Since we want the agent to connect to our database on behalf of Atlas, it needs to know how to access it.
For this we can assign an agent multiple database connections. Either click the **Set up Database Connection** or

> select the **Database Connections** tab and hit **Create Connection**.

Reviewer 2: I will add a screen shot of clicking on **Set up Database Connection**

Author: Changed the preovois screenshot to contain this.

Reviewer 3: Agree

secret. If you need more info, [read this guide](/guides/deploying/secrets##using-iam-authentication). If your secret is
stored as a JSON, you can provide the path to the actual token using a dot-notation. For example, for a secret like
`{"password":"my_passw0rd!"}` you'd provide `.password` as the path to the token.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="env" label="Environment Variable">

You can tell the agent to look for the password in an environment variable. For example, if your password lives in an environment
variable like `DATABASE_PASSWORD=passw0rd` you'd provide `DATABASE_PASSWORD` to the agent.

:::danger
We advise to use either IAM authentication or a Secrets Manager to obtain a database password.
:::

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

To ensure the credentials are correct, Atlas will check if the credentials are working before we can save them. Hit
the **Test Connection** button and wait. It can take a few seconds before the agent will pick up the job and check
the connection to the database.

If all goes well, we should see a message telling us that Atlas was able to connect to our database through the

> agent.

Reviewer 3: Then the user needs to actually connect

Author: wdym?

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/6.png)
</details>

### Drift Detection

Managing database schemas is hard. Since they are the (oftentimes only) stateful component in an application, issues
originating in a faulty database state can have a wide impact on your products and services. A relatively simple issue

> that can have a huge impact is when the database schema is not in sync with what downstream consumers expect it to be.

Reviewer 3: i would skip all of this and just define drift detection. also don't need to "simple" or "huge"

2. Create a database user and grant it permission to authenticate using IAM, see
   [the GCP documentation](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/mysql/add-manage-iam-users)
   for instructions.

All other info required to obtain a token is derived from the CloudSQL endpoint you define in the connection modal.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="gcp_secrets" label="GCP Secrets Manager">

GCP Secrets Manager is a secret store you can use to retrieve a secret from. Find the project ID and secret name of your
secret. If you need more info, [read this guide](/guides/deploying/secrets##using-iam-authentication). If your secret is
stored as a JSON, you can provide the path to the actual token using a dot-notation. For example, for a secret like
`{"password":"my_passw0rd!"}` you'd provide `.password` as the path to the token.

</TabItem>
<TabItem value="env" label="Environment Variable">

You can tell the Agent to look for the password in an environment variable. For example, if your password lives in an
environment variable like `DATABASE_PASSWORD=passw0rd` you'd provide `DATABASE_PASSWORD` to the Agent.

> :::danger

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:::info
```

</Tabs>

To ensure the credentials are correct, Atlas will check if the credentials are working before we can save them. Hit
the **Test Connection** button and wait. It can take a few seconds before the Agent will pick up the job and check
the connection to the database.

If all goes well, we should see a message telling us that Atlas was able to connect to our database through the
Agent.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/6.png)
</details>

### Drift Detection

Once Atlas can connect to your database, it can start monitoring your schema and warn you if it detects a drift
between your migration directory and its deployment. In the migration directory overview, click on
**Enable Drift Detection**. You'll be asked which database connection the deployments are reachable on.

<details>
<summary>Screenshot Example</summary>

![](https://atlasgo.io/uploads/cloud/drift-detection/7.png)
</details>

Once enabled, Atlas will run drift detection jobs twice a day. If there is a drift, Atlas will provide you with detailed
information about the drift, including an ERD, HCL diff and SQL statements required to fix the drift.

> :::danger

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:::danger
```
